---
layout: post
title:  "Review of 'Homo Deus'"
date:   2017-09-13 
---

Homo Deus was the most thought provoking book I've read in a long time. Harari's combination of scholarship, storytelling, and humor kept the pages turning quickly.

The author sets out to explore the near future of the human race: what will we pursue? What problems will we choose to tackle? And will we proceed cautiously enough to avoid our own doom? He contends that we will seek to live forever and engineer supreme happiness and contentment during our long lives. To be gods, above nature. 

Note these aren't normative claims, rather predictions of human behavior. The benefits of these advances will be available to a more and more select few. Indeed, the underlying fabric of society could tear as a small elite become superhuman while the fundamental assumptions of Liberalism and the Enlightenment give way beneath us.

Throughout the book Harari asks the reader to question how humanism, the contemporary religion, will hold up in the face of an evolving technological and scientific landscape. For example, recent experiments in neuroscience suggest that "free will" as we usually conceive of it is pure fiction (as the author Sam Harris likes to say, even the illusion of free will is an illusion, if you pay enough attention to your subjective experience; see [this article](http://www.rifters.com/real/articles/NatureNeuroScience_Soon_et_al.pdf) by Siong Soon, et al.)

There is a case to be made that living organisms are nothing but fancy algorithms. Harari describes what could be the religion of the near future: dataism. The transition from humanism to dataism proceeds because we come to realize that, with good enough models and enough data, an outside party could know us better than we know ourselves. Individual liberty becomes suspicious if there is no 'individual', but many separate mental processes and brain functions, if there is no free will as such, and if our every mood and action can be predicted and perhaps even determined with enough data. All the time we provide more and more data to companies like Google, Facebook, Spotify, Apple, or whoever else has made the next life changing app.

Today we entrust individual humans to give meaning to their lives, to look within themselves to determine what is right, who should be our leaders and what our laws should be. Maybe in the future we will come to realize that there are algorithms other than the ones running in our heads which could do a much better job. Today we treat fictional entities, like corporations and nations, as agents capable of owning things and making decisions. We used to give the same privilege to gods. Why not algorithms? 

Homo Deus provides a lively discussion of humanity's philosophical evolution and where we are going next. Science and religion have been hard to reconcile for centuries, and Harari highlights how the religion of humanism may not fare any better than Greek polytheism in the long run. I highly recommend giving it a read. 
